##############################################
# Chapter 1: Our Picture of the Universe
############################################## 

Ptolemy's cosmological model had to make an assumption that the moon
followed a path that sometimes brought it twice as close to the earth as
at other times. 

Ptolemy's classic book "Almagest" is a worthy reading.
http://www.amazon.com/Ptolemys-Almagest-Ptolemy/dp/0691002606

"A good theory is characterized by the fact that it makes a number of
predictions that could in principle be disproved or falsified by
observation." -- Karl Popper

"In practice, what often happens is that a new theory is devised that is
really an extension of the previous theory." An example: very accurate
observations of planet Mercury revealed a difference between its motion
and the predictions of Newton's theory of gravity, but is predicted by
Einstein's general theory of relativity. 

"The eventual goal of science is to provide a single theory that
describes the whole universe."

Today the universe is described in two basic partial theories: the
general theory of relativity and quantum mechanics. These two theories
are inconsistent with each other, i.e., they cannot both be correct.

The ideas about unified scientific theories assume we are rational
beings who are free to observe the universe as we want and to draw
logical deductions from what we see.

############################################## 
# Chapter 2: Space and Time
############################################## 

Newton's laws of motion: 牛顿运动定律 The fundamental postulate of the
theory of relativity was that the laws of science should be the same for
all freely moving observers, no matter what their speed.
 
Radar uses round-trip time of the pulse to measure distance. This method
to measure distance is more precise, because we can measure time more
accurately than length.
 
Maxwell's equation predicted that the speed of light should be the same
whatever the speed of the source.
 
"Only events in the future (light cone) of (event) P can be affected by
what happens at P because nothing can travel faster than light."
 
The special relativity was developed by Einstein and Poincare in 1905
independently. It neglects gravitational effects. It was very successful
in explaining that the speed of light appears the same to all observers
and in describing what happens when things move at speeds close to the
speed of light. However, it was inconsistent with the Newtonian theory
of gravity.
 
Einstein suggested that gravity is not a force like other forces, but is
a consequence of the fact that space-time is not flat; it is
curved/warped (扭曲) by the distribution of mass and energy in it.
 
According to the general theory of relativity (GTR), bodies like the
earth are not made to move on curved orbits by a force called gravity;
instead, they follow the nearest thing to a straight path in a curved
space, which is called a geodesic (测地线).
 
"In general relativity, bodies always follow straight lines in
four-dimensional space-time, but the nevertheless appear to us to move
along curved paths in our three-dimensional space."
 
"Light rays too must follow geodesics in space-time."
 
Some (observation-confirmed) predictions of GTR:
- Light should be bent by gravitational fields.
- Time should appear to slower near a massive body like the earth. This
  fact has important implications in accuracy of the GPS system. See
http://www.astronomy.ohio-state.edu/~pogge/Ast162/Unit5/gps.html for a
more detailed explanation.
 
"Newton's laws of motion put an end to the idea of absolute position in
space. The theory of relativity gets rid of absolute time."

############################################## 
# Chapter 3: The Expanding Universe
##############################################

"Our modern picture of the universe dates back to only 1924, when the
American astronomer Edwin Hubble demonstrated that ours was not the only
galaxy."
 
The apparent brightness of a star depends on two factors: its luminosity
and its distance from us. Knowing the apparent brightness and either of
the two, the other factor can be worked out. The distance to another
galaxy can be computed based on this relationship and the assumption (of
Hubble's) that certain types of stars have the same luminosity (whose
value we already know).
 
Our sun is an ordinary, average-sized, yellow star, near the inner edge
of one of the spiral arms of the Milky Way galaxy, which is about one
hundred thousand light-years across.
 
We can tell the temperature of a star from the spectrum of its light.
 
Certain chemical element absorbs a characteristic set of very specific
colors. By matching these to those that are missing from a star's
spectrum, we can determine exactly which elements are present in the
star's atmosphere.
 
The Doppler effect says that when a source of light is moving towards us
then the wavelenght of the waves we receive is shorter than when the
source was stationary; and vice versa.
 
The fact that most galaxies are red-shifted implies that the universe is
expanding.
 
Friedmann's two simple assumptions about the universe:
- The universe looks identical in whichever direction we look.
- This would also be true if we were observing the universe from
  anywhere else.
 
There are three different kinds of models that obey Friedmann's two
fundamental assumptions.  
a) In the first kind (which Friedmann found) the universe is expanding
sufficiently slowly that the gravitational attraction between the
different galaxies causes the expansion to slow down and eventually
stop. The universe is not infinite in space in this model.  

b) In the second kind of model, space is bent like the surface of a
saddle, and therefore is infinite.  

c) In the third kind of model, with just the critical rate of expansion,
space is flat, and thus is also infinite.
 
To know which Friedmann model describes the universe, we need to know
the present rate of expansion of the universe and its present average
density. It is known that the universe is expanding by between 5 percent
and 10 percent every thousand million years. However, our uncertainty
about the present average density of the universe is greater. When we
add up the masses of all the stars we can see in all galaxies and all
the "dark matter", we get only one tenth of the amount required to halt
the expansion of the universe.
 
All Friedmann solutions imply the big bang.
 
"As far as we are concerned, events before the big bang can have no
consequences, so they should not form part of a scientific model of the
universe. We should therefore cut them out of the model and say that
time had a beginning at the big bang."
 
The work of Lifshitz and Khalatnikov showed that the universe COULD have
a big bang, if the GTR was correct. But it did not resolve the question
whether the GTR predicts that the universe SHOULD have a big bang.
 
Hawking and Penrose jointly proved in 1970 that there must have been a
big bang singularity provided only the GTR is correct and the universe
contains as much matter as we observe. However, Hawking changed his mind
later and believed that there was no singularity at the beginning of the
universe once quantum effects are taken into account.

############################################## 
# Chapter 4: The Uncertainty Principle
############################################## 

Max Planck suggested in 1900 that light, X rays, and other waves cannot
be emitted at an arbitrary rate, but only in certain packets called
"quanta", and each quantum had a certain amount of energy that was
greater the higher the frequency of the waves. This solved the obvious
false result that the total energy radiated from a hot object is
infinite.

"The more accurate you try to measure the position of the particle, the
less accurate you can measure its speed."

Heisenberg showed that the uncertainty in the position of the particle
times the uncertainty in its velocity times the mass of the particle can
never be smaller than a certain quantity, which is known as Planck's
constant (6.626068 × 10^(-34) m^2 kg / s).

Quantum mechanics does not predict a single definite result for an
observation. Instead, it predicts a number of different possible
outcomes and their likelihood.

The only areas of physical science into which quantum mechanics has not
yet been properly incorporated are gravity and the large-scale structure
of the universe.

The two-slit experiment showed that interference can also occur for
particles, as the duality introduced by quantum mechanics.

Bohr's model that there are limited set of allowed orbits of electrons
explained well the structure of the simplest atom, hydrogen, which has
only one electron orbiting around the nucleus. But it was unclear how it
can be extended to more complicated atoms. Quantum mechanics resolved
this difficulty by modeling an electron orbiting around the nucleus as a
wave.

In principle, quantum mechanics allows us to predict nearly everything
we see around us. In practice, the calculation required for system
containing more than a few electrons are so complicated that we cannot
do them.

Einstein's GTR is called a "classical theory", i.e., it does not take
account of the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics. It does not
lead to any discrepancy with observation is that all the gravitational
fields that we normally experience are very weak. However, the
singularity theorems indicate that gravitational fields should get very
strong in at least two situations: black holes, and the big bang, in
which cases quantum mechanics should be important.

Classical GTR, by predicting points of infinite density, predicts its
own downfall, just as classical (nonquantum) mechanics predicted its
downfall by suggesting that atoms should collapse to infinite density.

We do not yet have a consistent theory that unifies general relativity
and quantum mechanics. But we know a number of features it should have.

* Chapter 5: Elementary Particles and the Forces of Nature

Six flavors of quarks are know: up, down, strange, charmed, bottom and
up. The first three had been known since 1960s. The charmed quark was
discovered in 1974, the bottom in 1977, the top in 1995. Each flavor in
turn comes with three "colors" (labels): red, green, and blue.
 
A proton or neutron is made up of three quarks, one of each color.
 
We can create particles made up of the other quarks, but these all have
a much greater mass and decay very rapidly into protons and neutrons.
 
Since the wavelength of light is much larger than the size of an atom,
we cannot hope to "look" at the parts of an atom in the ordinary way.
Particles are in fact waves. The higher the energy of a particle, the
smaller the wavelength of the corresponding wave. So the best answer we
can give to this question depends on how high a particle energy we have
at our disposal, because this determines how small a length scale we can
look.

An electron volt is the energy gained by an electron from an electric
field of one volt.

As of the book was written, people had learned how to use
electromagnetic fields to give particles energies of at first millions
and then thousands of millions of electron volts. 

Using the particle/wave duality, everything in the universe can be
described in terms of particles. 

Particles have a property called "spin".

All the known particles in the universe can be divided into two groups:
particles of spin 1⁄2, which make up the matter in the universe, and
particles of spin 0, 1, and 2, which give rise to forces between the
matter particles.

All matter particles obey Pauli's "exclusion principle": two similar
particles cannot exist in the same state, i.e., they cannot have the
same position and the same velocity within the limits given by the
uncertainty principle. Force-carrying particles do not obey the
exclusion principle.


Dirac proposed in 1928 a theory that was consistent with both quantum
mechanics and the STR. It explained mathematically why the electron had
spin 1/2. It also predicted the existence of an anti-electron, or
positron, which was discovered in 1932.

Every particle has an antiparticle, with which it can annihilate.

Force-carrying particles exchanged between matter particles are said to
be "virtual particles" because they cannot be directly detected by a
particle detector. Their existence is indicated by the measurable effect
they have. In certain circumstances, force-carrying particles can be
detected as waves, such as waves of light or gravitational waves.

For convenience of the construction of partial theories, force-carrying
particles can be grouped into four man-made categories: gravitational
force, electromagnetic force, weak nuclear force, and strong nuclear
force. So far, the latter three forces can be successfully explained in
a unified theory, and gravity is left till later.

The existence of graviton had not been observed.

The strong nuclear force has a property called "confinement": it always
binds particles together into combinations that have no color. 

At normal energies, the strong nuclear force is strong and binds quarks
tightly together. Experiments with large particle accelerators indicate
that at high energies the strong force becomes much weaker, and the
quarks and the gluons behave almost like free particles. This is another
property of the strong nuclear force called "asymptotic freedom".

The grand unified theory (GUT) is a theory that combines the
electromagnetic, weak nuclear and strong nuclear forces. It does not
include gravity, and contains a number of parameters that cannot be
predicted from the theory but have to be fit in with experiment. The GUT
says that at some very high energy, called the "grand unification
energy", the three forces would all have the same strength and so could
just be different aspects of a single force. 

The value of the grand unification energy is unknown, but it probably
would be very large. It is impossible to test GUT directly in the
laboratory. There are low energy consequences of the theory that can be
tested.

Up to 1956 it was believed that the laws of physics obeyed each of three
separate symmetries called C, P, and T. In 1956, Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen
Ning Yang suggested that the weak force does not obey the symmetry P.
The weak force also does not obey the symmetry C. Cronin and Fitch
discovered CP symmetry was not obeyed in the decay of certain particles.
It is a theorem that any theory that obeys quantum mechanics and
relativity must always obey the combined symmetry CPT. Therefore, these
facts implied the laws of physics must not obey the symmetry T.

##############################################
# Chapter 6: Black Holes
############################################## 

Proposed by the American scientist John Wheeler in 1969, the term "black
hole" is of very recent origin. It represents a graphic description of
an idea that goes back at least two hundred years ago.

One must first understand the life cycle of a star before how a black
hole might be formed can be understood.

"The more fuel a star starts off with, the sooner it runs out."

A region of space-time, from which it (light and everything else) is not
possible to escape to reach a distant observer, is called a "black
hole." Its boundary is called the "event horizon."

Gravitational waves carry energy away from the objects that emit them.
Therefore a system a massive objects will settle down eventually to a
stationary state.

The "no hair" theorem ("a black hole has no hair") says: After
gravitational collapse a black hole must settle down into a state in
which it could be rotating, but not pulsating; its size and shape would
depend only on its mass and rate of rotation, and not on the nature of
the body that had collapsed to form it.

The "no hair" theorem is practically important because it greatly
restricts the possible types of black holes. It also means that a very
large amount of information about the body that has collapsed must be
lost when a black hole is formed, because afterward all we can possibly
measure about the body is its mass and rate of rotation.

"Quasi-stellar objects" are also called "quasars".

The theory of black holes was developed in great detail as a
mathematical model before there was any evidence from observation that
it was correct.
 
In 1963, M. Schmidt at the Palomar Observatory in California (very close
to San Diego!) measured the red shift of a faint starlike object in the
direction of the source of radio waves called 3C273 that was too large
to be caused by a gravitational field.
 
The case of Cygnus X-1 shows indication of a black hole. There are other
models to explain it that do not include a black hole, but a black hole
seems to be the only natural explanation of the observation.
 
The Chandrasekhar mass limits implies that low-mass black holes could
form only if matter was compressed to enormous densities by very large
external pressure, e.g., in the high temperatures and pressures of the
very early universe.

############################################## 
# Chapter 7: Black Holes Ain't So Black
##############################################

Black hoes glow like a hot body. The smaller they are, the more they
glow. Smaller black holes might actually turn out to be easier to detect
than large ones.
 
The second law of thermodynamics is never violated.
 
##############################################
# Chapter 8: The Origin and Fate of the Universe
##############################################
 
The GTR predicted that space-time began at the big bang singularity and
would come to an end either at the "big crunch" singularity (if the
whole universe recollapsed), or at a singularity inside a black hole. 

Hawking gave a talk in 1981 on cosmology in Vatican about the
possibility that space-time was finite but had no boundary. 

Temperature is a measure of the average energy of the particles.

At high enough temperatures, particles/antiparticles would be produced
more than they could annihilate; at lower temperatures, annihilation
would become faster than production.

At the big bang the universe is thought to have been infinitely hot. One
second after the big bang, it would have fallen to about ten thousand
million degrees, which can be reached in H-bomb explosions. The center
of the sun has ten million degrees. 

There are disk-like rotating galaxies and oval-shaped elliptical
galaxies having no overall rotation.

Neutron stars are very dense. 

A supernova happens when a star uses up its hydrogen, and the outer
region gets blown off in a tremendous explosion. A supernova outshine
all other stars in its galaxy.

Our sun is a second- or third- generation star. Heavier elements from an
earlier supernova formed bodies that now orbit the sun as planets like
the earth.

The earth acquired its initial atmosphere from the emission of gases
from the rocks. The early atmosphere contained no oxygen, but a lot of
other gases such as hydrogen sulfide. The first primitive forms of life
consumed various materials including hydrogen sulfide, and released
oxygen.

The "anthropic principle" says "We see the universe the way it is
because we exist." There are two versions: the weak and the strong.

We do not yet have a complete and consistent theory that combines
quantum mechanics and gravity. However, we are fairly certain of some
features that such a unified theory should have. 

1. It should incorporate Feynman's proposal to formulate quantum theory
in terms of a sum over histories.Imaginary time in a Euclidean
space-time can be used as a mathematical tool for calculation.

2. It also should incorporate Einstein's idea that the gravitational
field is represented by curved space-time; particles try to follow the
nearest thing to a straight path in a curves space.

The real importance of the singularity theorems was that they showed
that the gravitational field must become so strong that quantum
gravitational effects could not be ignored.

The "no boundary" proposal says that the universe could be finite in
imaginary time but without boundaries or singularities.

One might suggest that the so called imaginary time is really the real
time, and that what we call real time is just a figment of our
imagination.

COBE is the Cosmic Background Explorer satellite.

The no boundary proposal is a good scientific theory in the sense of
Karl Popper: it could have been falsified by observations but instead
its predictions have been confirmed.

Hawking's religious view is summarized in the concluding sentence of
this chapter. "But if the universe is really completely self-contained,
having no boundary or edge, it would have neither beginning nor end: it
would simply be. What place, then, for a creator?"

##############################################
# Chapter 9: The Arrow of Time
##############################################

The laws of science do not distinguish between the forward and backward
directions of time. However, there are at least three arrows of time
that do distinguish the past from the future.

1. The thermodynamic arrow, the direction of time in which disorder
increases.

2. The psychological arrow, the direction of time in which we remember
the past and not the future.

3. The cosmological arrow, the direction of time in which the universe
expands rather than contracts.

1 and 2 are essentially the same. We observe the thermodynamic arrow to
agree with the cosmological arrow is that intelligent beings can exist
only in the expanding phase.

##############################################
# Chapter 10: Wormholes and Time Travel
##############################################

The early universe did not have the kind of curvature required to allow
time travel.

The concept of a wormhole (a "bridge") was proposed in 1935 by Einstein
and N. Rosen.

Matter with negative energy density is needed to allow travel into the
past.

The Casimir effect provided an example of how quantum theory can allow
negative energy densities.

Radiation by black holes shows that quantum theory allows travel back in
time on a microscopic scale and that such time travel can produce
observable effects.

The chronology protection conjecture says that the laws of physics
conspire to prevent macroscopic bodies from carrying information into
the past.

"The possibility of time travel remains open."

##############################################
# Chapter 11: The Unification of Physics
##############################################

In 1984, there was a remarkable change of opinion of the unification
theory in favor of what are called "string theories."

In string theories, what were previously thought of as particles are now
pictured as waves traveling down the string. The emission or absorption
of one particle by another corresponds to the dividing or joining
together of strings.

String theories seem to be consistent only if space-time has either ten
or twenty-six dimensions.

##############################################
# Chapter 12: Conclusions
##############################################

If we do discover a complete theory, it should in time be understandable
in broad principle by everyone, not just a few scientists.
 
If we find the answer to that, it woulb be the ultimate triumph of human
reason 
- for then we would know the mind of God.
 
# Completed reading on 2012-01-21


